SQL statement, system variables: update expression indexes (#6185)
pingcap/docs: sql-statements/sql-statement-create-index.md

## Expression index

> In some scenarios, query conditions run a filtering process based on a certain expression. In these scenarios, the query performance is relatively poor because ordinary indexes cannot take effect, the query can only be executed by scanning the entire table. The expression index is a type of special index that can be created on an expression. Once an expression index is created, TiDB can use the index for the expression-based query, which significantly improves the query performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In some scenarios, the filtering condition of a query is based on a certain expression. In these scenarios, the query performance is relatively poor because ordinary indexes cannot take effect, the query can only be executed by scanning the entire table. The expression index is a type of special index that can be created on an expression. Once an expression index is created, TiDB can use the index for the expression-based query, which significantly improves the query performance.
```

For example, if you want to create an index based on `col1+cols2`, execute the following SQL statement:

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
CREATE INDEX idx1 ON t1 ((col1 + col2));
```

Or you can execute the following equivalent statement:

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
ALTER TABLE t1 ADD INDEX idx1((col1 + col2));
```

You can also specify the expression index when you create the table:

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
CREATE TABLE t1(col1 char(10), col2 char(10), key index((col1 + col2)));
```

You can drop an expression index in the same way as dropping an ordinary index:

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
DROP INDEX idx1 ON t1;
```

> **Note:**
>
> An expression index cannot be created on a primary key.
>
> The expression in an expression index cannot contain the following content:
>

> > - Volatile functions, such as `rand()`, `now()`.

Author: ```suggestion
> - Volatile functions, such as `rand()` and `now()`.
```

> - System variables and user variables.
> - Subqueries.

> > - `AUTO_INCREMENT` column. There is an exception: you can remove this restriction by setting the value of `tidb_enable_auto_increment_in_generated` (system variable) to `true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - `AUTO_INCREMENT` column. You can remove this restriction by setting the value of `tidb_enable_auto_increment_in_generated` (system variable) to `true`.
```

> - Window functions.
> - ROW functions, such as `create table t (j json, key k (((j,j))));`.
> - Aggregate functions.
> 
> An expression index implicitly takes up a name (for example, `_V$_{index_name}_{index_offset}`). If you try to create a new expression index with the name that a column has already had, an error occurs. In addition, if you add a new column with the same name, an error also occurs.
>

> > Make sure that the number of function parameters in the expression of an expression index is correct.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Make sure that the number of function parameters in the expression of an expression index is correct.
>
> When the expression of the index contains a string-related function, affected by the returned type and the length, creating the expression index might fail. In this situation, you can use the `cast()` function to explicitly specify the returned type and the length. 
```

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
CREATE TABLE t1(col1 char(10), col2 char(10), key index((col1 + col2)));
```

You can drop an expression index in the same way as dropping an ordinary index:

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
DROP INDEX idx1 ON t1;
```

> **Note:**
>
> An expression index cannot be created on a primary key.
>
> The expression in an expression index cannot contain the following content:
>
> - Volatile functions, such as `rand()` and `now()`.
> - System variables and user variables.
> - Subqueries.
> - `AUTO_INCREMENT` column. You can remove this restriction by setting the value of `tidb_enable_auto_increment_in_generated` (system variable) to `true`.
> - Window functions.
> - ROW functions, such as `create table t (j json, key k (((j,j))));`.
> - Aggregate functions.
> 
> An expression index implicitly takes up a name (for example, `_V$_{index_name}_{index_offset}`). If you try to create a new expression index with the name that a column has already had, an error occurs. In addition, if you add a new column with the same name, an error also occurs.
>
> Make sure that the number of function parameters in the expression of an expression index is correct.
>

> > When the expression of the index contains a string-related function, affected by the returned type and the length, creating the expression index might fail. In this situation, you can use the `cast()` function to explicitly specify the returned type and the length. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> When the expression of an index contains a string-related function, affected by the returned type and the length, creating the expression index might fail. In this situation, you can use the `cast()` function to explicitly specify the returned type and the length. 
```

## Expression index

> In some scenarios, query conditions run a filtering process based on a certain expression. In these scenarios, the query performance is relatively poor because ordinary indexes cannot take effect, the query can only be executed by scanning the entire table. The expression index is a type of special index that can be built on an expression. Once an expression index is built, TiDB can use the index for the expression-based query, which significantly improves the query performance.

Reviewer: @en-jin19 Global comment: built index --> create index

Author: ```suggestion
In some scenarios, query conditions run a filtering process based on a certain expression. In these scenarios, the query performance is relatively poor because ordinary indexes cannot take effect, the query can only be executed by scanning the entire table. The expression index is a type of special index that can be created on an expression. Once an expression index is created, TiDB can use the index for the expression-based query, which significantly improves the query performance.
```

> In some scenarios, query conditions run a filtering process based on a certain expression. In this case, the query performance is relatively poor because general indexes can not take effect in those scenarios, so the query can only be completed by traversing the entire table. Expression indexes are the special index that can be built on an expression. Once an expression index is built, you can use the index for the expression-based query, which significantly speeds up the query performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In some scenarios, query conditions run a filtering process based on a certain expression. In these scenarios, the query performance is relatively poor because ordinary indexes cannot take effect, the query can only be executed by scanning the entire table. The expression index is a type of special index that can be built on an expression. Once an expression index is built, TiDB can use the index for the expression-based query, which significantly improves the query performance.
```

> For example, if you want to build an index based on `col1+cols2`, execute the following SQL statement:

Author: ```suggestion
For example, if you want to create an index based on `col1+cols2`, execute the following SQL statement:
```

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
CREATE INDEX idx1 ON t1 ((col1 + col2));
```

Or you can execute the following equivalent statement:

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
ALTER TABLE t1 ADD INDEX idx1((col1 + col2));
```

> You can also specify the expression index when you build the table:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also specify the expression index when you create the table:
```

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
CREATE TABLE t1(col1 char(10), col2 char(10), key index((col1 + col2)));
```

You can drop an expression index in the same way as dropping an ordinary index:

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
DROP INDEX idx1 ON t1;
```

> **Note:**
>
> An expression index cannot be created on a primary key.
>
> The expression in an expression index cannot contain the following content:
>

> > - Volatile functions, such as `rand()`, `now()`, and so on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - Volatile functions, such as `rand()`, `now()`.
```

> > - volatile functions, such as `rand()`, `now()`, and so on.

Author: ```suggestion
> - Volatile functions, such as `rand()`, `now()`, and so on.
```

> > - system variables and user variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - System variables and user variables.
```

> > -Subqueries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - Subqueries.
```

> > - `AUTO_INCREMENT` column. However, there is one exception: you can remove this restriction by setting the value of `tidb_enable_auto_increment_in_generated` (system variable) to `true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - `AUTO_INCREMENT` column. There is an exception: you can remove this restriction by setting the value of `tidb_enable_auto_increment_in_generated` (system variable) to `true`.
```

> > - window functions.

Author: ```suggestion
> - Window functions.
```

> - ROW functions, such as `create table t (j json, key k (((j,j))));`.

> > - aggregate functions.

Reviewer: @en-jin19 Could you please ensure you haven't missed a global comment? https://github.com/pingcap/docs/pull/6185#discussion_r691908185

Author: ```suggestion
> - Window functions.
> - ROW functions, such as `create table t (j json, key k (((j,j))));`.
> - Aggregate functions.
```

> 
> An expression index takes names implicitly by setting `_V$_{index_name}_{index_offset}`. Suppose you try to set a new expression index's name that a column has taken when creating an expression index. In that case, an error returns in this process. Besides, if you add a column with an existing name, the same error returns.
>
> The number of parameters of the functions that are in an expression with expression indexes must be correct.

> When the expression in a query statement matches the expression in an expression index, the optimizer can choose to use the expression index for the query. In some cases, the optimizer may not select an expression index depending on statistics. At that time, you can force the optimizer to select an expression index by specifying optimizer hints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the expression in a query statement matches the expression in an expression index, the optimizer can choose the expression index for the query. In some cases, the optimizer might not choose an expression index depending on statistics. In this situation, you can force the optimizer to select an expression index by using optimizer hints.
```

> In the following examples, suppose that you build the expression index `idx` on the expression `lower(col1)`:

Author: ```suggestion
In the following examples, suppose that you create the expression index `idx` on the expression `lower(col1)`:
```

> For example, suppose you build the expression index `idx` on the expression `lower(col1)`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following examples, suppose that you build the expression index `idx` on the expression `lower(col1)`:
```

> If the results of the query statement are the same expressions, you can use expression indexes. Take the following statements as an example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the results of the query statement are the same expressions, the expression index applies. Take the following statement as an example:
```

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
SELECT lower(col1) FROM t;
```

> If the same expressions are included in the filtering conditions, you can use expression indexes. Take the following statements as an example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the same expression is included in the filtering conditions, the expression index applies. Take the following statements as an example:
```

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
SELECT * FROM t WHERE lower(col1) = "a";
SELECT * FROM t WHERE lower(col1) > "a";
SELECT * FROM t WHERE lower(col1) BETWEEN "a" AND "b";
SELECT * FROM t WHERE lower(col1) in ("a", "b");
SELECT * FROM t WHERE lower(col1) > "a" AND lower(col1) < "b";
SELECT * FROM t WHERE lower(col1) > "b" OR lower(col1) < "a";
```

> When the queries are sorted by the same expressions, you can use expression indexes. Take the following statements as an example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the queries are sorted by the same expression, the expression index applies. Take the following statement as an example:
```

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
SELECT * FROM t ORDER BY lower(col1);
```

> If the same expression is included in the aggregate (`GROUP BY`) functions, the expression index applies. Take the following statement as an example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the same expression is included in the aggregate (`GROUP BY`) functions, the expression index applies. Take the following statements as an example:
```

> If the same expressions are included in the aggregate (`GROUP BY`) functions, you can use expression indexes. Take the following statements as an example:

Reviewer: Please modify this sentence according to the above comments. Thanks

Author: ```suggestion
If the same expression is included in the aggregate (`GROUP BY`) functions, the expression index applies. Take the following statement as an example:
```

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
SELECT max(lower(col1)) FROM t；
SELECT min(col1) FROM t GROUP BY lower(col1);
```

> To see the expression corresponding to the expression index, run `show index`, or check the system table `information_schema.tidb_indexes` and the table `information_schema.STATISTICS`. The Expression in the output indicates the corresponded expression. As for the indexes that are not expression indexes, the column shows `NULL`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To see the expression corresponding to the expression index, execute `show index`, or check the system tables `information_schema.tidb_indexes` and the table `information_schema.STATISTICS`. The `Expression` column in the output indicates the corresponded expression. For the non-expression indexes, the column shows `NULL`.
```

The cost of maintaining an expression index is higher than that of maintaining other indexes, because the value of the expression needs to be calculated whenever a row is inserted or updated. The value of the expression is already stored in the index, so this value does not require recalculation when the optimizer selects the expression index.

Therefore, when the query performance outweighs the insert and update performance, you can consider indexing the expressions.

> Expression indexes have the same syntax and limitations as in MySQL. They are implemented by building indexes on generated virtual columns that are invisible, so the supported expressions inherit all [limitations of virtual generated columns](/generated-columns.md#limitations).

Author: ```suggestion
Expression indexes have the same syntax and limitations as in MySQL. They are implemented by creating indexes on generated virtual columns that are invisible, so the supported expressions inherit all [limitations of virtual generated columns](/generated-columns.md#limitations).
```

## Associated session variables

The global variables associated with the `CREATE INDEX` statement are `tidb_ddl_reorg_worker_cnt`, `tidb_ddl_reorg_batch_size`, `tidb_ddl_reorg_priority`, and `tidb_enable_auto_increment_in_generated`. Refer to [system variables](/system-variables.md#tidb_ddl_reorg_worker_cnt) for details.

## MySQL compatibility

* `FULLTEXT`, `HASH` and `SPATIAL` indexes are not supported.
* Descending indexes are not supported (similar to MySQL 5.7).
* Adding the primary key of the `CLUSTERED` type to a table is not supported. For more details about the primary key of the `CLUSTERED` type, refer to [clustered index](/clustered-indexes.md).

> * Expression indexes are incompatible with views. When you query contents by using views, the expression index can not be used at the same time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Expression indexes are incompatible with views. When a query is executed using a view, the expression index cannot be used at the same time.
```

> * There are compatibility issues between expression indexes and bindings. When an expression in an expression index has constants, the binding created for the corresponding query expands its scope. For example, suppose the expression in the expression index is   `a+1`, and the corresponding query condition is  `a+1 > 2`. In this case, the binding is `a+? > ?`, which means that the queries such as  `a+2 > 2` are also forced to use the expression index. It results in a poor execution plan. Besides, this also affects the baseline capturing and baseline evolution belonging to SQL Plan Management.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Expression indexes have compatibility issues with bindings. When the expression of an expression index has a constant, the binding created for the corresponding query expands its scope. For example, suppose that the expression in the expression index is   `a+1`, and the corresponding query condition is  `a+1 > 2`. In this case, the created binding is `a+? > ?`, which means that the query with the condition such as  `a+2 > 2` is also forced to use the expression index and results in a poor execution plan. In addition, this also affects the baseline capturing and baseline evolution in SQL Plan Management (SPM).
```

> * There are compatibility issues between expression indexes and bindings. When an expression in an expression index has constants, the binding created for the corresponding query expands its scope. For example, suppose the expression in the expression index is   `a+1`, and the corresponding query condition is  `a+1 > 2`. In this case, the binding is `a+? > ?`, which means that the queries such as  `a+2 > 2` are also forced to select expression indexes. It results in a poor execution plan. Besides, this also affects the baseline capturing and baseline evolution belonging to SQL Plan Management.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* There are compatibility issues between expression indexes and bindings. When an expression in an expression index has constants, the binding created for the corresponding query expands its scope. For example, suppose the expression in the expression index is `a+1`, and the corresponding query condition is  `a+1 > 2`. In this case, the binding is `a+? > ?`, which means that the queries such as  `a+2 > 2` are also forced to use the expression index. It results in a poor execution plan. Besides, this also affects the baseline capturing and baseline evolution belonging to SQL Plan Management.
```

> * Expression indexes have compatibility issues with bindings. When the expression of an expression index has a constant, the binding created for the corresponding query expands its scope. For example, suppose that the expression in the expression index is   `a+1`, and the corresponding query condition is  `a+1 > 2`. In this case, the created binding is `a+? > ?`, which means that the query with the condition such as  `a+2 > 2` is also forced to use the expression index and results in a poor execution plan. In addition, this also affects the baseline capturing and baseline evolution in SQL Plan Management (SPM).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Expression indexes have compatibility issues with bindings. When the expression of an expression index has a constant, the binding created for the corresponding query expands its scope. For example, suppose that the expression in the expression index is  `a+1`, and the corresponding query condition is  `a+1 > 2`. In this case, the created binding is `a+? > ?`, which means that the query with the condition such as  `a+2 > 2` is also forced to use the expression index and results in a poor execution plan. In addition, this also affects the baseline capturing and baseline evolution in SQL Plan Management (SPM).
```
